## Introduction

A year ago, in August 2019, I shared one of my projects called [Ultimate Go Study Guide on GitHub](https://github.com/hoanhan101/ultimate-go),
and surprisingly, it got a lot of attention from the community.
Fast forward to August 2020, it now has over 12K stars, 900 forks with the help of
more than 20 contributors.

The project is a collection of my notes while learning Go programming language
from [Ardan Lab's Ultimate Go course](https://www.oreilly.com/library/view/ultimate-go-programming/9780134757476/).
Honestly, I couldn’t thank Bill Kennedy and
the Ardan Labs team enough for open-sourcing this wonderful material. They’ve done
such great jobs putting together their knowledge, insights into their courses, and
making them available to the public.

Different people have different learning styles. For me, I learn best by doing and
walking through examples. That said, I take notes carefully, comment directly on
the source code to make sure that I understand every single line of code as I am
reading and also be mindful of the theories behind the scene.

As Ultimate Go Study Guide keeps growing, there’s one issue that keeps coming up.
That’s about the format of the project. Specifically, many people have requested
an ebook version where the content is more streamlined and they can read it at
their convenience.

So, here comes The Ultimate Go Study Guide eBook version. For the last 3 months or
so, I have spent most of my free time putting together everything from Ultimate Go
Study Guide into a 200-page book. Other than all the good stuff from Ultimate Go,
two new and better things in this version are:

- Follow-along code input and output.
- Diagrams.

Hope it makes your journey of learning Go a bit easier. And again, thank you all
for your support. I really appreciate it.

Happy reading!

## Language Mechanics

### Syntax

#### Variable

##### Built-in types

Type provides integrity and readability by asking 2 questions:

- What is the amount of memory that we allocate? (e.g. 32-bit, 64-bit)
- What does that memory represent? (e.g. int, uint, bool,..)

Type can be specific such as int32 or int64. For example,

- uint8 contains a base 10 number using one byte of memory
- int32 contains a base 10 number using 4 bytes of memory.

When we declare a type without being very specific, such as uint or int, it gets
mapped based on the architecture we are building the code against. On a 64-bit OS,
int will map to int64. Similarly, on a 32 bit OS, it becomes int32.

**Word size**

The word size is the number of bytes in a word, which matches our address size.
For example, in 64-bit architecture, the word size is 64 bit (8 bytes), address
size is 64 bit then our integer should be 64 bit.

##### Zero value concept

Every single value we create must be initialized. If we don't specify it, it will
be set to the zero value. The entire allocation of memory, we reset that bit to 0.

| Type           | Zero value |
| -------------- | ---------- |
| Boolean        | false      |
| Integer        | 0          |
| Floating Point | 0          |
| Complex        | 0i         |
| String         | ""         |
| Pointer        | nil        |

##### Declare and initialize

var is the only guarantee to initialize a zero value for a type.

```go
var a int
var b string
var c float64
var d bool
fmt.Printf("var a int \t %T [%v]\n", a, a)
fmt.Printf("var b string \t %T [%v]\n", b, b)
fmt.Printf("var c float64 \t %T [%v]\n", c, c)
fmt.Printf("var d bool \t %T [%v]\n\n", d, d)
```

```
var a int     int [0]
var b string  string []
var c float64 float64 [0]
var d bool    bool [false]
```

**Strings are a series of uint8 types.**

A string is a two-word data structure: the first word represents a pointer to a
backing array, the second word represents its length. If it is a zero value then
the first word is nil, the second word is 0.

Using the short variable declaration operator, we can define and initialize at the
same time.

```go
aa := 10
bb := "hello" // 1st word points to a array of characters, 2nd word is 5 bytes
cc := 3.14159
dd := true

fmt.Printf("aa := 10 \t %T [%v]\n", aa, aa)
fmt.Printf("bb := \"hello\" \t %T [%v]\n", bb, bb)
fmt.Printf("cc := 3.14159 \t %T [%v]\n", cc, cc)
fmt.Printf("dd := true \t %T [%v]\n\n", dd, dd)
```

```
aa := 10      int [10]
bb := "hello" string [hello]
cc := 3.14159 float64 [3.14159]
dd := true    bool [true]
```

##### Conversion vs casting

Go doesn't have casting, but conversion. Instead of telling a compiler to pretend
to have some more bytes, we have to allocate more memory like so.

```go
aaa := int32(10)
fmt.Printf("aaa := int32(10) %T [%v]\n", aaa, aaa)
```

```
aaa := int32(10) int32 [10]
```

#### Struct

_example_ represents a type with different fields.

```go
type example struct {
    flag    bool
    counter int16
    pi      float32
}
```

##### Declare and initialize

Declare a variable of type example set to its zero value.

```go
var e1 exa

fmt.Printf("%+v\n", e1)
```

```
{flag:false counter:0 pi:0}
```

**How much memory do we allocate for _example_ ?**

A bool is 1 byte, int16 is 2 bytes, float32 is 4 bytes. Putting together, we have
7 bytes. However, the actual answer is 8. That leads us to a new concept of
padding and alignment. The padding byte is sitting between the bool and the int16.
The reason is because of alignment.

The idea of alignment: It is more efficient for this piece of hardware to read
memory on its alignment boundary. We will take care of the alignment boundary
issues so the hardware people don't.

**Rule 1:**

Depending on the size of a particular value, Go determines the alignment we need.
Every 2 bytes value must follow a 2 bytes boundary. Since the bool value is only 1
byte and starts at address 0, then the next int16 must start on address 2. The
byte at the address that gets skipped over becomes 1-byte padding. Similarly, if
it is a 4-byte value then we will have a 3-byte padding value.

**Rule 2:**

The largest field represents the padding for the entire struct. We need to
minimize the amount of padding as possible. Always lay out the field from highest
to smallest. This will push any padding down to the bottom. In this case, the
entire struct size has to follow a 8 bytes value because int64 is 8 bytes.

```go
type example struct {
    counter int64
    pi      float32
    flag    bool
}
```

Declare a variable of type example and init using a struct literal. Every line
must end with a comma.

```go
e2 := example{
    flag:    true,
    counter: 10,
    pi:      3.141592,
}
fmt.Println("Flag", e2.flag)
fmt.Println("Counter", e2.counter)
fmt.Println("Pi", e2.pi)
```

```
Counter 10
Pi 3.141592
Flag true
```

Declare a variable of an anonymous type and init using a struct literal. This is a
one-time thing.

```go
e3 := struct {
    flag    bool
    counter int16
    pi      float32
}{
    flag:    true,
    counter: 10,
    pi:      3.141592,
}
fmt.Println("Flag", e3.flag)
fmt.Println("Counter", e3.counter)
fmt.Println("Pi", e3.pi)
```

```
Flag true
Counter 10
Pi 3.141592
```

##### Name type vs anonymous type

If we have two name type identical struct, we can't assign one to another. For
example, example1 and example2 are identical struct and we initialize var ex1
example1, var ex2 example2. Letting ex1 = ex2 is not allowed. We have to
explicitly say that ex1 = example1(ex2) by performing a conversion. However, if ex
is a value of identical anonymous struct type (like e3 above), then it is possible
to assign ex1 = ex.

```go
var e4 example
e4 = e3
fmt.Printf("%+v\n", e4)
```

```
{flag:true counter:10 pi:3.141592}
```

#### Pointer

##### Everything is about pass by value

Pointers serve only 1 purpose: sharing. Pointers share values across the program
boundaries. There are several types of program boundaries. The most common one is
between function calls. We can also have a boundary between Goroutines which we
will discuss later.

When this program starts up, the runtime creates a Goroutine. Every Goroutine is a
separate path of execution that contains instructions that needed to be executed
by the machine. We can also think of Goroutines as lightweight threads. This
program has only 1 Goroutine: the main Goroutine.

Every Goroutine is given a block of memory, called the stack. The stack memory in
Go starts out at 2K. It is very small. It can change over time. Every time a
function is called, a piece of stack is used to help that function run. The
growing direction of the stack is downward.

Every function is given a stack frame, memory execution of a function. The size of
every stack frame is known at compile time. No value can be placed on a stack
unless the compiler knows its size ahead of time. If we don't know the size of
something at compile time, it has to be on the heap.

Zero value enables us to initialize every stack frame that we take. Stacks are
self cleaning. We clean our stack on the way down. Every time we make a function,
zero value initialization cleans the stack frame. We leave that memory on the way
up because we don't know if we would need that again.

##### Pass by value

Declare variable of type int with a value of 10. This value is put on a stack with
a value of 10.

```go
count := 10

// To get the address of a value, we use &.
println("count:\tValue Of[", count, "]\tAddr Of[", &count, "]")

// Pass the "value of" count.
increment1(count)

// Printing out the result of count. Nothing has changed.
println("count:\tValue Of[", count, "]\tAddr Of[", &count, "]")

// Pass the "address of" count. This is still considered pass by value,
// not by reference because the address itself is a value.
increment2(&count)

// Printing out the result of count. count is updated.
println("count:\tValue Of[" , count, "]\tAddr Of[", &count, "]")
```

```go
func increment1(inc int) {
    // Increment the "value of" inc.
    inc++
    println("inc1:\tValue Of[", inc, "]\tAddr Of[", &inc, "]")
}

/*
increment2 declares count as a pointer variable whose value is always
an address and points to values of type int. The * here is not an
operator. It is part of the type name. Every type that is declared,
whether you declare or it is pre-declared, you get for free a pointer.
*/
func increment2(inc *int) {
    // Increment the "value of" count that the "pointer points to".
    // The * is an operator. It tells us the value of the pointer points to.
    *inc++
    println ("inc2:\tValue Of[", inc, "]\tAddr Of[", &inc, "]\tValue Points To[", *inc, "]")
}
```

```
count: Value Of[ 10 ] Addr Of[ 0xc000050738 ]
inc1:  Value Of[ 11 ] Addr Of[ 0xc000050730 ]
count: Value Of[ 10 ] Addr Of[ 0xc000050738 ]
inc2:  Value Of[ 0xc000050738 ] Addr Of[ 0xc000050748 ] Value Points To[ 11 ]
```

#### Escape analysis

stayOnStack shows how the variable does not escape. Since we know the size of the
user value at compile time, the compiler will put this on a stack frame.

```go
// user represents an user in the system.
type user struct {
    name  string
    email string
}

func stayOnStack() user {
    // In the stack frame, create a value and initialize it.
    u := user{
      name:  "Hoanh An",
      email: "hoanhan101@gmail.com",
    }

    // Return the value, pass back up to the main stack frame.
    return u
}
```

escapeToHeap shows how the variable escapes. This looks almost identical to the
stayOnStack function. It creates a value of type user and initializes it. It seems
like we are doing the same here. However, there is one subtle difference: we do
not return the value itself but the address of u. That is the value that is being
passed back up the call stack. We are using pointer semantics.

You might think about what we have after this call is: main has a pointer to a
value that is on a stack frame below. If this is the case, then we are in trouble.
Once we come back up the call stack, this memory is there but it is reusable
again. It is no longer valid. Anytime now main makes a function call, we need to
allocate the frame and initialize it.

Think about zero value for a second here. It enables us to initialize every stack
frame that we take. Stacks are self cleaning. We clean our stack on the way down.
Every time we make a function call, zero value, initialization, we are cleaning
those stack frames. We leave that memory on the way up because we don't know if we
need that again.

Back to the example. It is bad because it looks like we take the address of user
value, pass it back up to the call stack giving us a pointer which is about to get
erased. However, that is not what will happen.

What is actually going to happen is escape analysis. Because of the line "return
&u", this value cannot be put inside the stack frame for this function so we have
to put it out on the heap.

Escape analysis decides what stays on the stack and what does not. In the
stayOnStack function, because we are passing the copy of the value itself, it is
safe to keep these things on the stack. But when we SHARE something above the call
stack like this, escape analysis says this memory is no longer valid when we get
back to main, we must put it out there on the heap. main will end up having a
pointer to the heap. In fact, this allocation happens immediately on the heap.
escapeToHeap is gonna have a pointer to the heap. But u is gonna base on value
semantics.

```go
func escapeToHeap() *user {
    u := user{
        name:  "Hoanh An",
        email: "hoanhan101@gmail.com",
    }

    return &u
}
```

**What if we run out of stack space?**

What happens next is during that function call, there is a little preamble that
asks "Do we have enough stack space for this frame?". If yes then no problem
because at compile time we know the size of every frame. If not, we have to have a
bigger frame and these values need to be copied over. The memory on that stack
moves. It is a trade off. We have to take the cost of this copy because it doesn't
happen a lot. The benefit of using less memory in any Goroutine outweighs the
cost.

Because the stack can grow, no Goroutine can have a pointer to some other
Goroutine stack. There would be too much overhead for the compiler to keep track
of every pointer. The latency will be insane.

The stack for a Goroutine is only for that Goroutine. It cannot be shared between
Goroutines.

**Garbage collection**

Once something is moved to the heap, Garbage Collection has to get in. The most
important thing about the Garbage Collector (GC) is the pacing algorithm. It
determines the frequency/pace that the GC has to run in order to maintain the
smallest possible t.

Imagine a program where you have a 4 MB heap. GC is trying to maintain a live heap
of 2 MB. If the live heap grows beyond 4 MB, we have to allocate a larger heap.
The pace the GC runs at depends on how fast the heap grows in size. The slower the
pace, the less impact it is going to have. The goal is to get the live heap back
down.

When the GC is running, we have to take a performance cost so all Goroutines can
keep running concurrently. The GC also has a group of Goroutines that perform the
garbage collection work. It uses 25% of our available CPU capacity for itself.
More details about GC and pacing algorithm can be find at:
https://docs.google.com/document/d/1wmjrocXIWTr1JxU-3EQBI6BK6KgtiFArkG47XK73xIQ/ed
it?usp=sharing

#### Function

```go
// user is a struct type that declares user information.
type user struct {
    ID   int
    Name string
}

// updateStats provides update stats.
type updateStats struct {
    Modified int
    Duration float64
    Success  bool
    Message  string
}

func main() {
    // Retrieve the user profile.
    u, err := retrieveUser("Hoanh")
    if err != nil {
        fmt.Println(err)
        return
    }

    // Display the user profile. Since the returned u is an address,
    // use * to get the value.
    fmt.Printf("%+v\n" , *u)

    // Update user name. Don't care about the update stats. This _ is
    // called a blank identifier. Since we don't need anything outside the
    // scope of if, we can use the compact syntax.
    if _, err := updateUser(u); err != nil {
        fmt.Println(err)
        return
    }

    // Display the update was successful.
    fmt.Println("Updated user record for ID", u.ID)
}
```

retrieveUser retrieves the user document for the specified user. It takes a string
type name and returns a pointer to a user type value and bool type error.

```go
func retrieveUser(name string) (*user, error) {
    // Make a call to get the user in a json response.
    r, err := getUser(name)
    if err != nil {
        return nil, err
    }

    // Create a value type user to unmarshal the json document into.
    var u user

    // Share the value down the call stack, which is completely safe
    // so the Unmarshal function can read the document and initialize it.
    err = json.Unmarshal([]byte(r), &u)

    // Share it back up the call stack. Because of this line, we know
    // that this creates an allocation. The value is the previous step is not
    // on the stack but on the heap.
    return &u, err
}
```

getUser simulates a web call that returns a json document for the specified user.

```go
func getUser(name string) (string, error) {
    response := `{"ID":101, "Name":"Hoanh"}`
    return response, nil
}
```

updateUser updates the specified user document

```go
func updateUser(u *user) (*updateStats, error) {
    // response simulates a JSON response.
    response := `{"Modified":1, "Duration":0.005, "Success" : true, "Message": "updated"}`

    // Unmarshal the JSON document into a value of the userStats struct type.
    var us updateStats
    if err := json.Unmarshal([]byte(response), &us); err != nil {
        return nil, err
    }

    // Check the update status to verify the update is successful.
    if us.Success != true {
        return nil, errors.New(us.Message)
    }

    return &us, nil
}
```

```
{ID:101 Name:Hoanh}
Updated user record for ID 101
```

#### Constant

Constants are not variables. Constants have a parallel type system all to
themselves. The minimum precision for constant is 256 bit. They are considered to
be mathematically exact. Constants only exist at compile time.

##### Declare and initialize

Constants can be typed or untyped. When it is untyped, we consider it as a kind.
They are implicitly converted by the compiler.

Untyped constants.

```go
const ui = 12345    // kind: integer
const uf = 3.141592 // kind: floating-point
```

Typed constants still use the constant type system but their precision is
restricted.

```go
const ti int = 12345        // type: int
const tf float64 = 3.141592 // type: float64
```

This doesn't work because constant 1000 overflows uint8.

```go
const myUint8 uint8 = 1000
```

Constant arithmetic supports different kinds. Kind Promotion is used to determine
kind in these scenarios. All of this happens implicitly.

Variable answer will be of type float64.

```go
var answer = 3 * 0.333 // KindFloat(3) * KindFloat(0.333)
fmt.Println(answer)
```

```
0.999
```

Constant third will be of kind floating point.

```go
const third = 1 / 3.0 // KindFloat(1) / KindFloat(3.0)
fmt.Println(third)
```

```
0.3333333333333333
```

Constant zero will be of kind integer.

```go
const zero = 1 / 3 // KindInt(1) / KindInt(3)
fmt.Println(zero)
```

```
0
```

This is an example of constant arithmetic between typed and untyped constants.
Must have like types to perform math.

```go
const one int8 = 1
const two = 2 * one // int8(2) * int8(1)

fmt.Println(one)
fmt.Println(two)
```

```
1
2
```

Max integer value on 64 bit architecture.

```go
const maxInt = 9223372036854775807
fmt.Println(maxInt)
```

```
9223372036854775807
```

bigger is a much larger value than int64 but still compiled because of the untyped
system. 256 is a lot of space (depending on the architecture).

```go
const bigger = 9223372036854775808543522345
```

However, biggerInt Will NOT compile because it exceeds 64 bit.

```go
const biggerInt int64 = 9223372036854775808543522345
```

##### iota

```go
const (
    A1 = iota // 0 : Start at 0
    B1 = iota // 1 : Increment by 1
    C1 = iota // 2 : Increment by 1
)

fmt.Println("1:", A1, B1, C1)

const (
    A2 = iota // 0 : Start at 0
    B2        // 1 : Increment by 1
    C2        // 2 : Increment by 1
)

fmt.Println("2:", A2, B2, C2)

const (
    A3 = iota + 1 // 1 : Start at 0 + 1
    B3            // 2 : Increment by 1
    C3            // 3 : Increment by 1
)

fmt.Println("3:", A3, B3, C3)

const (
    Ldate= 1 << iota //  1 : Shift 1 to the left 0. 0000 0001
    Ltime            //  2 : Shift 1 to the left 1. 0000 0010
    Lmicroseconds    //  4 : Shift 1 to the left 2. 0000 0100
    Llongfile        //  8 : Shift 1 to the left 3. 0000 1000
    Lshortfile       // 16 : Shift 1 to the left 4. 0001 0000
    LUTC             // 32 : Shift 1 to the left 5. 0010 0000
)
fmt.Println("Log:", Ldate, Ltime, Lmicroseconds, Llongfile, Lshortfile, LUTC)
```

```
1: 0 1 2
2: 0 1 2
3: 1 2 3
Log: 1 2 4 8 16 32
```
