#### Embedding

##### Declaring fields, NOT Embedding

user defines a user in the program.

```go
type user struct {
    name  string
    email string
}
```

notify implements a method notifies users of different events.

```go
func (u *user) notify() {
    fmt.Printf("Sending user email To %s<%s>\n", u.name, u.email)
}
```

admin represents an admin user with privileges. person user is not embedding. All we do here is just create a person field based on that other concrete type named user.

```go
type admin struct {
    person user // NOT Embedding
    level  string
}
```

Create an admin user using struct literal. Since a person also has struct type, we use another literal to initialize it.

```go
func main() {
    ad := admin{
        person: user{
            name:  "Hoanh An",
            email: "hoanhan101@gmail.com",
        },
        level: "superuser",
    }
```

We call notify through the person field through the admin type value.

```go
    ad.person.notify()
```

```
Sending user email To Hoanh An<hoanhan101@gmail.com>
```

##### Embedding types

user defines a user in the program.

```go
type user struct {
    name  string
    email string
}
```

notify implements a method notifies users of different events.

```go
func (u *user) notify() {
    fmt.Printf("Sending user email To %s<%s>\n", u.name, u.email)
}
```

admin represents an admin user with privileges. Notice that we don't use the field person here anymore. We are now embedding a value of type user inside the value of type admin. This is an inner-type-outer-type relationship where user is the inner type and admin is the outer type.

##### Inner type promotion

What special about embedding in Go is that we have an inner type promotion mechanism. In other words, anything related to the inner type can be promoted up to the outer type. It will mean more in the construction below.

```go
type admin struct {
    user  // Embedded Type
    level string
}
```

We are now constructing an outer type admin and inner type user. This inner type value now looks like a field, but it is not a field. We can access it through the type name like a field. We are initializing the inner value through the struct literal of the user.

```go
func main() {
    ad := admin{
        user: user{
            name:  "Hoanh An",
            email: "hoanhan101@gmail.com",
        },
        level: "superuser",
    }

    // We can access the inner type's method directly.
    ad.user.notify()
    ad.notify()
}
```

Because of inner type promotion, we can access the notify method directly through the outer type. Therefore, the output will be the same.

```
Sending user email To Hoanh An<hoanhan101@gmail.com>
Sending user email To Hoanh An<hoanhan101@gmail.com>
```

##### Embedded type and Interface

notifier is an interface that defines notification type behavior.

```go
type notifier interface {
    notify()
}
```

user defines a user in the program.

```go
type user struct {
    name  string
    email string
}
```

notify implements a method notifies users of different events using a pointer receiver.

```go
func (u *user) notify() {
    fmt.Printf("Sending user email To %s<%s>\n", u.name, u.email)
}
```

admin represents an admin user with privileges.

```go
type admin struct {
    user
    level string
}

func main() {
    // Create an admin user.
    ad := admin{
        user: user{
            name: "Hoanh An",
            email: "hoanhan101@gmail.com",
        },
        level: "superuser",
    }
```

Send the admin user a notification.

We are passing the address of outer type value. Because of inner type promotion, the outer type now implements all the same contract as the inner type.

```go
    sendNotification(&ad)
```

Embedding does not create a sub typing relationship. user is still user and admin is still admin. The behavior that inner type value uses, the outer type exposes it as well. It means that outer type value can implement the same interface/same contract as the inner type.

We are getting type reuse. We are not mixing or sharing state but extending the behavior up to the outer type.

We have our polymorphic function here. sendNotification accepts values that implement the notifier interface and sends notifications.

```go
func sendNotification(n notifier) {
    n.notify()
}
```

```
Sending user email To Hoanh An<hoanhan101@gmail.com>
```

##### Outer and inner type implementing the same interface

notifier is an interface that defines notification type behavior.

```go
type notifier interface {
    notify()
}
```

user defines a user in the program.

```go
type user struct {
    name  string
    email string
}
```

notify implements a method notifies users of different events.

```go
func (u *user) notify() {
    fmt.Printf("Sending user email To %s<%s>\n", u.name, u.email)
}
```

admin represents an admin user with privileges.

```go
type admin struct {
    user
    level string
}
```

notify implements a method notifies admins of different events. We now have two different implementations of notifier interface, one for the inner type, one for the outer type. Because the outer type now implements that interface, the inner type promotion doesn't happen. We have overwritten through the outer type anything that the inner type provides to us.

```go
func (a *admin) notify() {
    fmt.Printf("Sending admin email To %s<%s>\n", a.name, a.email)
}
```

Create an admin user.

```go
func main() {
    ad := admin{
        user: user{
            name: "Hoanh An",
            email: "hoanhan101@gmail.com",
        },
        level: "superuser",
    }
```

Send the admin user a notification. The embedded inner type's implementation of the interface is NOT "promoted" to the outer type.

```go
    sendNotification(&ad)
```

We can access the inner type's method directly.

```go
    ad.user.notify()
```

The inner type's method is NOT promoted.

```go
   ad.notify()
```

```
Sending admin email To Hoanh An<hoanhan101@gmail.com>
Sending user email To Hoanh An<hoanhan101@gmail.com>
Sending admin email To Hoanh An<hoanhan101@gmail.com>
```

#### Exporting

##### Guideline

Package is a self-contained unit of code. Anything that is named in a given package can be exported or accessible through other packages or unexported or not accessible through other packages.

##### Exported identifier

Package counters provides alert counter support.

```go
package counters
```

alertCounter is an unexported named type that contains an integer counter for alerts. The first character is in upper-case format so it is considered to be exported.

```go
type AlertCounter int
```

alertCounter is an unexported named type that contains an integer counter for alerts. The first character is in lower-case format so it is considered to be unexported. It is not accessible for other packages, unless they are part of the package counters themselves.

```go
type alertCounter int
```

In the main package, try to import the counters package.

```go
package main

import (
    "fmt"

    "github.com/hoanhan101/counters"
)
```

Create a variable of the exported type and initialize the value to 10.

```go
counter := counters.AlertCounter(10)
```

However, when we create a variable of the unexported type and initialize the value to 10.

```go
counter := counters.alertCounter(10)
```

The compiler will say:

- cannot refer to unexported name counters.alertCounter
- undefined: counters.alertCounter

##### Accessing a value of an unexported identifier

Package counters provides alert counter support.

```go
package counters
```

alertCounter is an unexported named type that contains an integer counter for alerts.

```go
type alertCounter int
```

Declare an exported function called New - a factory function that knows how to create and initialize the value of an unexported type. It returns an unexported value of alertCounter.

```go
func New(value int) alertCounter {
    return alertCounter(value)
}
```

The compiler is okay with this because exporting and unexporting is not about the value like private and public mechanism, it is about the identifier itself. However, we don't do this since there is no encapsulation here. We can just make the type exported.

Access a value of an unexported identifier.

```go
package main

import (
    "fmt"

    "github.com/hoanhan101/counters"
)
```

Create a variable of the unexported type using the exported New function from the package counters.

```go
func main() {
    counter := counters.New(10)
    fmt.Printf("Counter: %d\n", counter)
}
```

```
Counter: 10
```

##### Unexported fields from an exported struct

Package users provides support for user management.

```go
package users
```

Exported type User represents information about a user. It has 2 exported fields: Name and ID and 1 unexported field: password.

```go
type User struct {
    Name string
    ID   int

    password string
}
```

```go
package main

import (
    "fmt"

    "github.com/hoanhan101/users"
)
```

Create a value of type User from the users package using struct literal. However, since password is unexported, it cannot be compiled

```
unknown field 'password' in struct literal of type users.User
```

##### Exported types with embedded unexported types

Package users provides support for user management.

```go
package users
```

user represents information about a user. Unexported type with 2 exported fields

```go
type user struct {
    Name string
    ID   int
}
```

Manager represents information about a manager. Exported type embedded the unexported field user.

```go
type Manager struct {
    Title string

    user
}
```

```go
package main

import (
    "fmt"

    "github.com/hoanhan101/users"
)
```

Create a value of type Manager from the users package. During construction, we are only able to initialize the exported field Title. We cannot access the embedded type directly.

```go
func main() {
    u := users.Manager{
        Title: "Dev Manager",
    }
```

However, once we have the manager value, the exported fields from that unexported type are accessible.

```go
    u.Name = "Hoanh"
    u.ID = 101
    fmt.Printf("User: %#v\n", u)
}
```

```
User: users.Manager{Title:"Dev Manager", user:users.user{Name:"Hoanh", ID:101}}
```

Again, we don't do this. A better way is to make user exported.

## Software Design

### Composition

#### Grouping types

##### Grouping By State

This is an example of using type hierarchies with an OOP pattern. This is not something we want to do in Go. Go does not have the concept of sub-typing. All types are their own and the concepts of base and derived types do not exist in Go. This pattern does not provide a good design principle in a Go program.

Animal contains all the base attributes for animals.

```go
type Animal struct {
    Name     string
    IsMammal bool
}
```

Speak provides generic behavior for all animals and how they speak. This is kind of useless because animals themselves cannot speak. This cannot apply to all animals.

```go
func (a *Animal) Speak() {
    fmt.Println("UGH!",
        "My name is", a.Name,
        ", it is", a.IsMammal,
        "I am a mammal")
}
```

Dog contains everything from Animal, plus specific attributes that only a Dog has.

```go
type Dog struct {
    Animal
    PackFactor int
}
```

Speak knows how to speak like a dog

```go
func (d *Dog) Speak() {
    fmt.Println("Woof!",
        "My name is", d.Name,
        ", it is", d.IsMammal,
        "I am a mammal with a pack factor of", d.PackFactor)
}
```

Cat contains everything from Animal, plus specific attributes that only a Cat has.

```go
type Cat struct {
    Animal
    ClimbFactor int
}
```

Speak knows how to speak like a cat.

```go
func (c *Cat) Speak() {
    fmt.Println("Meow!",
        "My name is", c.Name,
        ", it is", c.IsMammal,
        "I am a mammal with a climb factor of", c.ClimbFactor)
}
```

It's all fine until this one. This code will not compile. Here, we try to group the Cat and Dog based on the fact that they are Animals. We are trying to leverage sub-typing in Go. However, Go doesn't have it. Go doesn't encourage us to group types by common DNA. We need to stop designing APIs around this idea that types have a common DNA because if we only focus on who we are, it is very limiting on who we can group with. Sub-typing doesn't promote diversity. We lock types in a very small subset that can be grouped with. But when we focus on behavior, we open up the entire world to us.

Create a Dog by initializing its Animal parts and then its specific Dog attributes.

```go
animals := []Animal{
    Dog{
        Animal: Animal{
            Name: "Fido",
            IsMammal: true,
        },
        PackFactor: 5,
    },
```

Create a Cat by initializing its Animal parts and then its specific Cat attributes.

```go
    Cat{
        Animal: Animal{
            Name: "Milo",
            IsMammal: true,
        },
        ClimbFactor: 4,
    },
}
```

Have the Animals speak.

```go
    for _, animal := range animals {
        animal.Speak()
    }
}
```

This code smells bad because:

- The Animal type provides an abstraction layer of reusable state.
- The program never needs to create or solely use a value of Animal type.
- The implementation of the Speak method for the Animal type is generalization.
- The Speak method for the Animal type is never going to be called.

##### Grouping By Behavior

This is an example of using composition and interfaces. This is something we want to do in Go.

This pattern does provide a good design principle in a Go program. We will group common types by their behavior and not by their state. What brilliant about Go is that it doesn't have to be configured ahead of time. The compiler automatically identifies interface and behaviors at compile time. It means that we can write code today that is compliant with any interface that exists today or tomorrow. It doesn't matter where that is declared because the compiler can do this on the fly. Stop thinking about a concrete base type. Let's think about what we do instead.

Speaker provide a common behavior for all concrete types to follow if they want to be a part of this group. This is a contract for these concrete types to follow. We get rid of the Animal type.

```go
type Speaker interface {
    Speak()
}
```

Dog contains everything a Dog needs.

```go
type Dog struct {
    Name       string
    IsMammal   bool
    PackFactor int
}
```

Speak knows how to speak like a dog. This makes a Dog now part of a group of concrete types that know how to speak.

```go
func (d Dog) Speak() {
    fmt.Println("Woof!",
        "My name is", d.Name,
        ", it is", d.IsMammal,
        "I am a mammal with a pack factor of", d.PackFactor)
}
```

Cat contains everything a Cat needs. A little copy and paste can go a long way. Decoupling, in many cases, is a much better option than reusing the code.

```go
type Cat struct {
    Name        string
    IsMammal    bool
    ClimbFactor int
}
```

Speak knows how to speak like a cat. This makes a Cat now part of a group of concrete types that know how to speak.

```go
func (c Cat) Speak() {
    fmt.Println("Meow!",
        "My name is", c.Name,
        ", it is", c.IsMammal,
        "I am a mammal with a climb factor of", c.ClimbFactor)
}
```

Create a list of Animals that know how to speak.

```go
func main() {
    speakers := []Speaker{
```

Create a Dog by initializing Dog attributes.

```go
        Dog{
            Name:       "Fido",
            IsMammal:   true,
            PackFactor: 5,
        },
```

Create a Cat by initializing Cat attributes.

```go
        Cat{
            Name:       "Milo",
            IsMammal:   true,
            ClimbFactor: 4,
        },
    }
```

Have the Speakers speak.

```go
    for _, spkr := range speakers {
        spkr.Speak()
    }
```

```
Woof! My name is Fido , it is true I am a mammal with a pack factor of 5
Meow! My name is Milo , it is true I am a mammal with a climb factor of 4
```

Guidelines around declaring types:

- Declare types that represent something new or unique. We don't want to create aliases just for readability.
- Validate that a value of any type is created or used on its own.
- Embed types not because we need the state but because we need the behavior. If we are not thinking about behavior, we are locking ourselves into the design that we cannot grow in the future.
- Question types that are aliases or abstraction for an existing type.
- Question types whose sole purpose is to share common state.
